# Alignment
The player must choose an alignment for the character. In some cases (for example the paladin), the choice of alignment may be limited.

The character's alignment is his basic moral and ethical attitudes toward others, society, good, evil, and the forces of the universe in general. The chosen alignment is a guide to provide a clearer idea of how the character will handle moral dilemmas.

Alignment is not a straitjacket that restricts the character; it doesn't prevent a character from changing his beliefs, acting irrationally, or behaving out of character, however choices *do* have consequences. That can be as extreme as a character permanently losing their class or, less severe, suffering a penalty to the experience gained in the current level. There are game mechanics attached to alignment (such as magical weapons that do more damage against enemies of a specific alignment) and for these to work the game implicitly requires that good and evil, law and chaos, and neutrality be reduced to immutable, objective, universal, and more-or-less constant.  

Alignment is divided into two parts: the domain of law and chaos, and the axis of good and evil. By combining the different variations within the two sets, nine distinct alignments are created. These nine alignments serve to define the attitudes of most of the people in the world.

## Law, Neutrality, and Chaos
Attitudes toward order and chaos are divided into *three opposing* beliefs which can be imagined as a triangle where each point pulls away from the other two. The points are Law, Chaos, and Neutrality. One of these three represents a character's ethos--that is, his understanding of society and relationships. 

Lawful characters believe that order and organisation is the natural state of the universe, and that this should be reflected in societal groups that provide continuity and predictability, often through the creation of laws and rules (and typically hierarchy) and the structures that create and enforce these norms: guilds, churches, states, etc. Lawful should not however be understood to be law-abiding; the thief that successfully climbs to the position of guildmaster likely tends to be lawful despite his criminality. Lawful may also be understood as somewhat collectivist - the view that the individual must serve and obey (and/or be served and obeyed) within their established community.

Chaotic characters believe there is no preordained order in the universe; they view the world as a collection of things and events, some related and others completely independent. Consequently they reject the idea that some external agent has authority to impose laws and dictate traditions. While they, in principle, tend to favour the absolute freedom of anarchy, they often pragmatically accept that societal groupings - ones which individuals voluntarily choose to belong to - serve a function in preserving and protecting the personal rights, freedoms and autonomy they value. Just as lawful does not mean law-abiding, chaotic is not synonymous with law-breaking - chaotic characters simply believe legitimate law should be determined by agreement of free-willed individuals, not diktat. 

Neutrality is often thought of as a midpoint between the two extremes of law and chaos, however this is inaccurate. Neutrality stands opposite the partisanship of both law and chaos, rejecting the dichotomy that destiny is either shaped by an innate order within the universe *or* by individuals. This may be due to simple indifference to, and detachment from, the struggle between law and chaos, or because of a belief that it is the very balance between these forces that sustains the universe. In this framework, chance creates a balance, sometimes favouring the individual, sometimes aligning with the Cosmic order, sometimes both, and sometimes neither, ensuring that neither law nor chaos dominates completely. Neutral philosophers theorise that if the balance tips too far in any direction the fabric of reality itself could be torn apart.
## Good, Neutrality and Evil
Also divided into three parts, this axis describes, more or less, a character's moral outlook. Perhaps the simplest divisions between good and evil (in the game at least) is selflessness vs selfishness, constructive vs. destructive.

Good characters strive to help others and make the world a better place. They try to be fair, forthright, and charitable. Certainly there are always failings and weaknesses as people are not perfect, but the good person worries about his errors and tries to correct any damage done. Goodness does not only manifest in heroic acts - intervening to calm a heated argument, helping to collect items a stranger has dropped, giving a lost person directions, or giving an ear to someone's troubles are things good characters do by default. Martyrdom is good taken to it's most extreme.
 
Evil is the antithesis of good and can manifest in many forms, both overt and subtle. Evil creatures may be cruel, malicious, dominating, or they may simply be indifferent to or even unaware of the harm they cause. They care only for themselves (though sometimes they rationalise their acts as serving some greater good) and have no hesitation in coercing, exploiting, and carrying out violence where it furthers their agenda, and have little or no remorse. Psychopathy is evil taken to it's most extreme.

Neutrality on the good-evil axis is primarily amorality. This includes all that lack capacity to make moral judgements, for example most animals which simply act according to their instinct. It also includes people who believe things simply "are as they are" and do not judge acts as good or evil. Also within the neutral camp are those who *do* judge acts as good and evil but accept that both must exist to balance the other, the pragmatists who set aside their moral perceptions and instead focus on practicality.

## Alignment Combinations
Combining the two axes above results in nine different alignments. Each alignment varies from all others, sometimes in broad, obvious ways, and sometimes in subtle ways. Each combination of alignments is briefly described below:

### Lawful Good
Characters of this alignment believe that an orderly, strong society with a well-organised government can work to make life better for the majority of the people. To ensure the quality of life, laws must be created and obeyed. When people respect the laws and try to help one another, society as a whole prospers. Therefore, lawful good characters strive for those things that will bring the greatest benefit to the most people and cause the least harm. An honest and hard-working serf, a kindly and wise king, or a stern but forthright minister of justice are all examples of lawful good people. Example: King Arthur, Captain America

### Lawful Neutral
Order and organisation are of paramount importance to characters of this alignment. They believe in a strong, well-ordered government, whether that government is a tyranny or benevolent democracy. The benefits of organisation and regimentation outweigh any moral questions raised by their actions. An inquisitor determined to ferret out traitors at any cost or a soldier who never questions his orders are good examples of lawful neutral behaviour. Example: Agent Smith (from the Matrix), Judge Dredd

### Lawful Evil
These characters believe in using society and its laws to benefit themselves. Structure and organisation elevate those who deserve to rule as well as provide a clearly defined hierarchy between master and servant. To this end, lawful evil characters support laws and societies that protect their own concerns. If someone is hurt or suffers because of a law that benefits lawful evil characters, too bad. Lawful evil characters obey laws out of fear of punishment. Because they may be forced to honour an unfavourable contract or oath they have made, lawful evil characters are usually very careful about giving their word. Once given, they break their word only if they can find a way to do it legally, within the laws of the society. An iron-fisted tyrant and a devious, greedy merchant are examples of lawful evil beings. Darth Vader, Magneto

### Neutral Good
These characters believe that a balance of forces is important, but that the concerns of law and chaos do not moderate the need for good. Since the universe is vast and contains many creatures striving for different goals, a determined pursuit of good will not upset the balance; it may even maintain it. If fostering good means supporting organised society, then that is what must be done. If good can only come about through the overthrow of existing social order, so be it. Social structure itself has no innate value to them. A baron who violates the orders of his king to destroy something he sees as evil is an example of a neutral good character. Example: Samwise Gamgee, Spiderman

### True Neutral 
True neutral characters believe in the ultimate balance of forces, and they refuse to see actions as either good or evil. Since the majority of people in the world make judgments, true neutral characters are extremely rare. True neutrals do their best to avoid siding with the forces of either good or evil, law or chaos. It is their duty to see that all of these forces remain in balanced contention.

True neutral characters sometimes find themselves forced into rather peculiar alliances. To a great extent, they are compelled to side with the underdog in any given situation, sometimes even changing sides as the previous loser becomes the winner. A true neutral druid might join the local barony to put down a tribe of evil gnolls, only to drop out or switch sides when the gnolls were brought to the brink of destruction. He would seek to prevent either side from becoming too powerful. Clearly, there are very few true neutral characters in the world. Example: The Doctor, Rorschach (from the Watchmen)

### Neutral Evil
Neutral evil characters are primarily concerned with themselves and their own advancement. They have no particular objection to working with others or, for that matter, going it on their own. Their only interest is in getting ahead. If there is a quick and easy way to gain a profit, whether it be legal, questionable, or obviously illegal, they take advantage of it. Although neutral evil characters do not have the every-man-for-himself attitude of chaotic characters, they have no qualms about betraying their friends and companions for personal gain. They typically base their allegiance on power and money, which makes them quite receptive to bribes. An unscrupulous mercenary, a common thief, and a double-crossing informer who betrays people to the authorities to protect and advance himself are typical examples of neutral evil characters. Example: Sauron, Cersei Lannister

### Chaotic Good
Chaotic good characters are strong individualists marked by a streak of kindness and benevolence. They believe in all the virtues of goodness and right, but they have little use for laws and regulations. They have no use for people who "try to push folk around and tell them what to do." Their actions are guided by their own moral compass which, although good, may not always be in perfect agreement with the rest of society. A brave frontiersman forever moving on as settlers follow in his wake is an example of a chaotic good character. Example: Robin Hood, Zorro

### Chaotic Neutral
Chaotic neutral characters believe that there is no order to anything, including their own actions. With this as a guiding principle, they tend to follow whatever whim strikes them at the moment. Good and evil are irrelevant when making a decision. Chaotic neutral characters are extremely difficult to deal with. Such characters have been known to cheerfully and for no apparent purpose gamble away everything they have on the roll of a single die. They are almost totally unreliable. In fact, the only reliable thing about them is that they cannot be relied upon! This alignment is perhaps the most difficult to play. Lunatics and madmen tend toward chaotic neutral behavior. Example: Jack Sparrow, Deadpool

### Chaotic Evil
These characters are the bane of all that is good and organized. Chaotic evil characters are motivated by the desire for personal gain and pleasure. They see absolutely nothing wrong with taking whatever they want by whatever means possible. Laws and governments are the tools of weaklings unable to fend for themselves. The strong have the right to take what they want, and the weak are there to be exploited. When chaotic evil characters band together, they are not motivated by a desire to cooperate, but rather to oppose powerful enemies. Such a group can be held together only by a strong leader capable of bullying his underlings into obedience. Since leadership is based on raw power, a leader is likely to be replaced at the first sign of weakness by anyone who can take his position away from him by any method. Bloodthirsty buccaneers and monsters of low Intelligence are fine examples of chaotic evil personalities. Example, The Joker, Voldemort

## Non-Aligned Creatures
As mentioned earlier, some things--particularly animals and unintelligent monsters, do not have moral and ethical concerns, alignment is simply not applicable. For game purposes (such as spells or magic items that detect or affect specific alignments) these creatures are treated as true neutral unless their description or some other rule states otherwise. A dog or a horse, no matter how well trained or loyal to a character, is still an animal.

## Choosing an Alignment
Aside from character classes or kits that require specific alignments, players are free to choose any alignment for their character. However there are a few things the player should consider in making a choice.

First, alignment is an aid to role-playing the choices your character would make and should be used that way. Don't choose an alignment that will not be fun for you to play, or one that will make it too hard to play the character as you intend to portray them - if you do you will likely just end up shifting alignment anyways (remembering that changing alignment does affect your character). The idea of having a somewhat 'fixed' alignment is to encourage you to role-play a specific persona, and to challenge you to approach problems within a moral and ethical frame that might mean the easiest solution is not one your character would consider. Moral and ethical dilemmas can add depth and tension to the story moving the game beyond simple hack & slash.

Second, the game revolves around cooperation among everyone in the group. When choosing alignments consider how your choice will affect the party dynamics - A lawful good character and an evil character are eventually going to come to odds, and the group will eventually find itself arguing more than adventuring. Disagreement within the party is unavoidable, and sometimes amusing to role-play, but picking alignments that are incompatible with those of other party members is ultimately destructive to the party and to the game. 

Third, remember your party is (usually) intended to be the protagonists in the story, not the villains. While an anti-hero protagonist can make for an interesting story, evil-aligned characters are not well-suited - if alignment is played correctly - to working as a harmonious group; squabbling, betrayal, coercion and bullying would be common-place. Lawful evil characters might be able to reach an agreement that they would abide by for a time, but would do as little as required by the agreement... 'So sorry, freeing people from traps was *not* part of our agreement, but the redivision of treasure in the event that someone dies is... ta-ta.'

Again, choose an alignment that will be fun for you, but consider carefully how you will be able to play the chosen alignment without derailing the game and ruining the fun for everybody.

## Changing Alignment
As mentioned before alignment is a tool, not a straitjacket and it is possible for alignment to shift after the character is created. Sometimes this shift is a deliberate role-playing choice of the player to reflect how their character's ethical and moral code is evolving based on their experiences. Sometimes it is a consequence of a character repeatedly acting inconsistently with their espoused alignment. Regardless of the cause, changing alignment does have consequences.

Most often the character's alignment will change because the player focused more on what his character *could* do than on what he *would* do, and the actions chosen are more in line with a different alignment. For example, a lawful good fighter ignores his village council's plea for help because he wants to pursue a different evil. This is more in-line with Chaotic Good as the character is placing his own desire over the needs of the community. This single act does not instantly cause a change to his alignment, but if on balance the character's actions fall outside of his stated alignment it will eventually shift to one that is more appropriate.

Sometimes the player will decide to intentionally change his character's alignment - perhaps for story reasons, perhaps not - In this case the player should inform the DM of this intention, and then try to play as the new alignment - the change is accomplished by deeds not words and, as above, a single act does not cause a change to alignment, but if on-balance the character acts in line with the new alignment, they will eventually shift.

Finally, some magic effects can temporarily alter a character's alignment - sometimes instantly, other times gradually - if this happens the player should make their best attempt to role-play the change. While induced alignment changes still have an effect, they are neither as permanent nor as damaging as changes resulting from choices made of the character's own free will.

When a character changes alignment they are in effect 'unlearning' how they previously interacted with the world and trying to develop new behaviours - this 're-learning' takes time and is reflected in a **penalty to the experience points gained in their current level**. For classes that require specific alignments they **may be forced to permanently revert to a different class** (for example a Paladin that is no longer lawful good becomes a fighter). Likewise where a kit requires a specific alignment or class, and that prerequisite is no longer met the kit is also abandoned. Magical items and artefacts that are only usable by specific alignments will cease to function (or may even become a danger to the wielder). In the campaign, word is likely to circulate amongst acquaintances of the character about the 'change of heart', and these NPCs may react differently to the person, depending on their own attitudes - some may warm to them, others may cool, some might try to help him 'see the error of his ways', others may simply refuse to interact with them further or stop providing services. 

Ultimately, the player is advised to pick an alignment he can play comfortably, one that fits in with those of the rest of the group, and this should be the alignment for the course of the character's career. There will be times that situations test the character's resolve and ethics - finding the right course of action - within the character's alignment - is part of the challenge and fun of role-playing.

## Example of Alignment in Play
Below are two contrived scenarios with a party consisting of one person of each alignment combination to illustrate how the character's decisions might be influenced by their beliefs and also to show the potential issues when a party has too many conflicting alignments.

### Scenario 1: The Battle
Upon penetrating the heart of the ruined castle, the party met its foe, a powerful gorgon commanded by a mad warrior. There, chained behind the two, was a helpless peasant kidnapped from a nearby village.

The lawful good character unhesitatingly (but not foolishly) entered battle; it was the right thing to do. He considered it his duty to protect the villagers. Besides, he could not abandon an innocent hostage to such fiends. He was willing to fight until he won or was dragged off by his friends. He had no intention of fighting to his own death, but he would not give up until he had tried his utmost to defeat the evil creatures.

The lawful evil character also entered the battle willingly. Although he cared nothing for the peasant, he could not allow the two fiends to mock him. Still, there was no reason for him to risk it all for one peasant. If forced to retreat, he could return with a stronger force, capture the criminals, and execute them publicly. If the peasant died in the meantime, their punishment would just be that much more horrible.

The lawful neutral character was willing to fight, because the villains threatened public order. However, he was not willing to risk his own life. He would have preferred to come back later with reinforcements. If the peasant could be saved, that is good, because he is part of the community. If not, it would be unfortunate but unavoidable.

The neutral good character did not fight the gorgon or the warrior, but he tried to rescue the peasant. Saving the peasant was worthwhile, but there was no need to risk injury and death along the way. Thus, while the enemy was distracted in combat, he tried to slip past and free the peasant.

The true neutral character weighed the situation carefully. Although it looked like the forces working for order would have the upper hand in the battle, he knew there had been a general trend toward chaos and destruction in the region that must be combatted. He tried to help, but if the group failed, he could work to restore the balance of law and chaos elsewhere in the kingdom.

The neutral evil character cared nothing about law, order, or the poor peasant. He figured that there had to be some treasure around somewhere. After all, the villain's lair had once been a powerful temple. He could poke around for cash while the others did the real work. If the group got into real trouble and it looked like the villains would attack him, then he would fight. Unfortunately, a stray magical arrow killed him just after he found a large gem.

The chaotic good character joined the fight for several reasons. Several people in the group were his friends, and he wanted to fight at their sides. Furthermore, the poor, kidnapped peasant deserved to be rescued. Thus, the chaotic good character fought to aid his companions and save the peasant. He didn't care if the villains were killed, captured, or just driven away. Their attacks against the village didn't concern him.

The chaotic neutral character decided to charge, screaming bloodthirsty cries, straight for the gorgon. Who knows? He might have broken its nerve and thrown it off guard. He discovered that his plan was a bad one when the gorgon's breath killed him.

The chaotic evil character saw no point in risking his hide for the villagers, the peasant, or the rest of the party. In fact, he thought of several good reasons not to. If the party was weakened, he might be able to take over. If the villains won, he could probably make a deal with them and join their side. If everyone was killed, he could take everything he wanted and leave. All these sounded a lot better than getting hurt for little or no gain. So he stayed near the back of the battle, watching. If anyone asked, he could say he was watching the rear, making sure no one came to aid the enemy.

### Scenario 2: Dividing the Treasure
Now imagine how a group of different alignments might seek to divide the treasure trove they won in the battle.

The lawful good character says, "Before we went on this adventure, we agreed to split the treasure equally, and that's what we're going to do. First, we'll deduct the costs of the adventure and pay for the resurrection of those who have fallen, since we're sharing all this equally. If someone can't be raised, then his share goes to his family."

"Since we agreed to split equally, that's fine," replies the lawful evil character thoughtfully." But there was nothing in this deal about paying for anyone else's expenses. It's not my fault if you spent a lot on equipment! Furthermore, this deal applies only to the surviving partners; I don't remember anything about dead partners. I'm not setting aside any money to raise that klutz. He's someone else's problem."

Flourishing a sheet of paper, the lawful neutral character breaks in. "It's a good thing for you two that I've got things together, nice and organized. I had the foresight to write down the exact terms of our agreement, and we're all going to follow them."

The neutral good character balances the issues and decides, "I'm in favor of equal shares--that keeps everybody happy. I feel that expenses are each adventurer's own business: If someone spent too much, then he should be more careful next time. But raising fallen comrades seems like a good idea, so I say we set aside money to do that."

After listening to the above arguments, the true neutral character decides not to say anything yet. He's not particularly concerned with any choice. If the issue can be solved without his becoming involved, great. But if it looks like one person is going to get everything, that's when he'll step in and cast his vote for a more balanced distribution.

The neutral evil character died during the adventure, so he doesn't have anything to say. However, if he could make his opinion known, he would gladly argue that the group ought to pay for raising him and set aside a share for him. The neutral evil character would also hope that the group doesn't discover the big gem he secretly pocketed during one of the encounters.

The chaotic good character objects to the whole business. "Look, it's obvious that the original agreement is messed up. I say we scrap it and reward people for what they did. I saw some of you hiding in the background when the rest of us were doing all the real fighting. I don't see why anyone should be rewarded for being a coward! As far as raising dead partners, I say that's a matter of personal choice. I don't mind chipping in for some of them, but I don't think I want everyone back in the group."

Outraged at the totally true but tactless accusation of cowardice, the chaotic evil character snaps back, "Look, I was doing an important job, guarding the rear! Can I help it if nothing tried to sneak up behind us? Now, it seems to me that all of you are pretty beat up--and I'm not. So, I don't think there's going to be too much objection if I take all the jewelry and that wand. And I'll take anything interesting those two dead guys have. Now, you can either work with me and do what I say or get lost--permanently!"

The chaotic neutral character is also dead (after he tried to charge a gorgon), so he doesn't contribute to the argument. However, if he were alive, he would join forces with whichever side appealed to him the most at the moment. If he couldn't decide he'd flip a coin.
